our next speaker um I've had such it's
been such a treat over the last uh
specifically over the last week of
installation but also over the past six
months uh to work with CC Moss um who's
the curator of the of Lauren Lee
McCarthy bodily autonomy our solo ex
exhibition presented on the occasion of
the festival um I have probably told
half of you this but I you know quoted
CC in my undergraduate thesis my
Master's thesis and have just have such
a deep respect for all of the work that
she's done and it's really informed the
way that I work as a curator today um
CeCe is a curator writer and educator
with 20 years of professional experience
a professional practice organizing solo
public or solo group touring and online
exhibitions as well as public programs
performances and screenings in museums
Galleries and Artist Run spaces you
might have seen her during the pandemic
uh driving a truck gas. Gallery um you
also might have seen her at ybca here in
San Francisco
where uh she was where she worked for
many years um without further Ado
CeCe thank
you hi everyone it's been a real honor
to be here with uh so many of my heroes
this
weekend so I'll just begin um often in
my classes at UC San Diego I begin the
quarter by asking students to De to
detail the most impactful exhibition
they've ever experienced to the other
students in the class it's a valuable
exercise as you realize that ultimately
these personal stories of say visiting
LACMA for the first time are what live
on after an exhibition
closes today I want to talk about the
Lasting Impressions made by exhibitions
and argue that
curators o re adjusting the
mic oh no it's the the first is
blank I got this it's I want you to pay
attention to me at the beginning and
then we have images after
that okay um so today um I want to talk
about the Lasting Impressions made by
exhibitions and argue that curators have
a responsibility to work towards a
profound a sense of a profound
heightened awareness and presence in
their practice particularly at a moment
marked by Distraction
Discord and
disconnection one of the most incredible
exhibitions I've ever curated was right
here in San Francisco at ybca in
2016 for Samara golden the images you
see behind me are of her solo exhibition
a trap and soft division which like much
of her work was an effort to bring
audiences into the totality of Human
Experience like visualizing every human
emotion occurring globally within each
second all 18 skylights in the gallery
contained small vignettes that offered a
snapshot into empty rooms with clothing
half eaten food lamps and other everyday
items below the skylights the entire
gallery floor was covered in Mirror
surrounded by a railing the ceiling
sculptures reflect on this mirrored
surface and their repetition drop the vi
inward producing a slight sensation of
vertigo holding onto the railing while
peering down into the illusion visitors
seem to look into an aerial depth from a
distance much like a mall Atrium but
instead of seeing the floor however one
sees the ceiling
reflected Samara talks about her work as
quote a window into a complexity that is
always around us but one we have to
block out so that we can live our
everyday lives end quote by placing us
in front of this complexity the work
effectively breaks through fleetingly
carving out a space that brings visitors
together through a joint
experience this gesture channels the
ingredients of our shared humanity and
Consciousness um like many of Golden's
past Works a trap in soft div Vision
creates a glimpse into a state that
indeed exists and is possible in
multifaceted
understanding of an
us this exhibition organized in Spring
2016 predated the Trump era the pandemic
and the tumultuousness of recent times
but it offers an important example of
the kinds of encounters that exhibitions
can and should strive for projects that
connect us with each other and Elevate
our awareness of the present the
conclusion from my first book expanded
internet art 21st century artistic
practice and the informational Mayu also
reflected on the present and it was
titled simply breaking presents I wanted
to pick up on some insights from the
concluding chapter in my talk
today for context the larger Arc of
expanded internet art provided the first
comprehensive art historical study of
expanded internet art practices and it
argued that in an era of social media
and smartphones internet art is no
longer determined solely by its
existence on the web
rather contemporary artists um are
making more art about informational
culture using various methods of both
online and offline means the intention
of the book was um the intention whoops
sorry oh yeah the intention of the book
was to understand the cultural
significance of the fact that art is
always online and that artists across
the Spectrum approach their work uh to
become more legible and functional as
information a result of what theorist
Tiana teranova called an informational
Mayu in the conclusion I argue that as
every aspect of life becomes enveloped
by optimization in a world of pure
calculation and production including art
itself artists should adapt critical
strategies that invite a full anation to
Our Moment artworks act they do and as
such they can seize the potency of our
present and intentionally yield
alternate future Pathways I note that in
this doing artworks can sink into the
conditions of their existence such as
the technology and the material the
systems they inhabit to open up new
potentials for the viewer and their life
world I term this freeing non-resolved
and non-productive encounter with a
present a breaking presence you see
glimpses of a breaking presence in
Samara Golden's a trap and soft a vision
the immensity of the entire installation
was impossible to accurately document
which you even find in the professional
photographs I shared earlier and there
was not a good angle corner or
background suitable for selfies you
truly had to put away your phone and
take it in and be and in be in and with
the
installation okay there we go in
preparation for days today's talk and to
illustrate this aspect within Samara
Golden's installation exhibition I went
through Instagram to find examples of
people attempting
and failing uh to shoot the show for
Instagram so for the image on the left
uh and several times people drop their
phones onto the mirror um trying to do
this precise move and um and my
colleagues uh who are working front of
house would have to retrieve the phones
for them um from the other side of the
railing and then on the other side um
the other and then the other photo which
is sort of kind of blah um so much so
that people would often with these sort
of blah photos uh write captions um
similarly to this one where it says to
you have to see in person this doesn't
really capture you have to go there um
so you know people were so
trained
uh sorry um
PE sorry um people were so trained and
ready to get that shot but no not
possible given how the instiution
installation was intentionally built
designing an experience against the
habitual normal and ubiquitous
stagecraft for phones is one means to
bring audiences into a heightened
awareness of the present I would also
argue that in this post-pandemic era
audiences possess a real desire for
authentic connection both with each
other in the present one not performed
by the camera or for the camera I was
floored by this deep need when I curated
How We Gather at the mandaville Art
Gallery at UC San Diego in Fall 2023 a
group in a group exhibition that
investigated the notion and enactment of
solidarity across various contemporary
artist practices through the lens of the
pandemic collaboration and mutuality
were key to the conception and
production of each featured artwork in
the exhibition as well as accompanying
weekly artistic Le uh public programs
that explored everything from touch as a
time-based medium to indigenous Futurity
the response to the exhibition at UC San
Diego was overwhelmingly positive in
terms of audience both in the gallery
and in the public programs which were
all at capacity one thing I recognized
and I'm certain that other Educators in
the room have had the same realization
is that the student population I serve
went through high school during the
pandemic and now that they're in college
they're eagerly seeking out
opportunities to form community in
person as they know how valuable and
important it is to have those
experiences this is of course true for
every everyone but I found it was so
immediate when you're talking about this
generation in
particular to provide a sense of How We
Gather um I wanted to Spotlight one
artwork by Kimmy hanor titled you
stranger may I be your kin uh the terms
of my death inet
perpetuity um from
2023 Kimmy printed their legally
functioning will on risograph sheets
which were then presented on music
stands in the gallery the text itself
which is written and Rewritten
throughout the Artic lifetime resists
con conventions of ownership and
heteronormative family structures and
instead acts as a proposal for
Collective care so for example one sheet
reads when you fall are you sure
there'll be someone there to catch
you and who have you been
catching I'm searching for forms or care
we can conjure in a world that relent
LLY doesn't or refuses to What occasion
will call on this us to
rise visitors were asked to read the
text on the music stands aloud either
alone or in groups an act which invited
readers to become collaborators through
verbal
recitation uh transforming readers from
strangers to Kin it's that movement
towards kinship in initiated through
reading poetry aloud or in a group they
sees as the primary Legacy that will
live on after
them whether you're looking over the
railing into a glimpse of the totality
of Human Experience such as in Golden
Samara Golden's
installation or being invited to reflect
on Collective care through through
recitation in the round such as in Kimmy
Honor's piece all of these gestures
heighten our Attunement both to our
existence within this moment and our
ties with each other this is precisely
the ambition that I've tried to realize
in the projects I've
curated I want to end this discussion I
want to end with a discussion of the
exhibition on view right behind everyone
um as part of the Festival this year
Lauren Lee McCarthy bodily
autonomy originating from the mandaville
Art Gallery at UC San Diego in Spring
2024 the exhibition brings together two
major works by the artist surrogate and
saliva bodily
autonomy invites visitors to fully
consider the social political legal and
experiential implications of genetic
development reproductive Technologies
bios surveillance and data privacy both
today and in the near future the
exhibition serves as a platform and a
social space for Urgent conversations
and inquiry humanizing abstract
scientific Concepts and Illuminating
their potential impact on her lives it's
this Lauren's ability to identify the
seismic influence of new technologies on
our lives and bring it into Focus
through humor discomfort recognition
that I think is so powerful about her
practice it was amazing to Stage this
project within a major research
University like UC San Diego which is
known globally for its strengths in
biotechnology and it really is a place
where a lot of this a a lot of these
things are being developed and to see um
a true organic uh conversation and
interdisciplinary conversation emerge um
through staging this exhibition in that
context for instance the SLA bar
exchanges which I'm sure everyone at
this point has taken it uh Taken part in
if you haven't you should after our
after uh this section um these slw
exchanges at UC San Diego were organized
On th Thursday nights over for the
three-month run and they took off the
students who ran the exchanges trained
directly with Lauren in a workshop and I
should note that a many of these
students were undergraduates in uh in
stem majors and this was their first
experience of participating in an art
exhibition or working with an artist The
Core Group operated the saliva bar
weekly on Thursday nights and the
gallery became a hangout space on those
days it was amazing to see how visitors
leaned into the prompts and made them
their own so for example when you donate
your DNA to the saliva exchange you are
asked to identify yourself so that other
users can select your
sample um visitors identified themselves
as SoundCloud wrappers vampires and more
and you can take a look at uh some of
these uh entries at
saliva. second you can add your own
terms of exchange my saliva sample that
I received asked that I present the vial
alongside a stuffed animal and in my
home um other directions included uh
taking one saliva sample on a hike or
pouring it into the ocean and then
lastly you can write secret messages to
the person receiving your saliva sample
people would write poetry to each other
using this field and all of this would
print out on the receipt which many of
you received um which you can take along
with the
sample Lauren created these openings
within the structure of the exchange and
audiences seized upon them and in those
m humans you see people's Humanity their
personality their selves in defiance of
the coldness of Corporations and other
entities who view people solely as data
to be
harvested not all the conversations
initiated by by salab bar were as
playful as I've described um I always
checked in with students after their
shifts to see how everything went and
some of them had serious and um
difficult conversations with
participants about dat data privacy and
about bios surveillance
one of the best articles to come out
about the exhibition was a feature
titled shock therapy on outline on
Outland by editorinchief Brian dwor in
it he says what's radical about this
participatory work is not the ick factor
of trading bodily fluids with strangers
but how it coaches the audience to think
about sharing themselves with intention
and care it's art that still aspires to
change how we live I love the statement
as I close my talk today I want to
emphasize that absolutely we should seek
out and support art that inspires to
change how we live My Hope Is that those
changes make us more critically aware of
the ever weird wild and evolving present
we inhabit and that they deepen our
shared connections our empathy towards
each
other so I appreciate your time today
and um here's where to find me and thank
you so much
[Applause]
thank you so much CeCe thank you this is
so fun this is fun yeah um I'm trying to
think of any question that I haven't
asked you in the last like 10 days of
being together and working on this show
um can you tell me maybe a little bit
more about your saliva exchange
experience and the vial that you
received yeah so as I mentioned um mine
uh so mine required me as part of the
tth exchange to um present nextto
stuffed animal my home and I think the
person also described themselves as
cockette um and
so and uh the the uh secret message was
hey
girl so um yes did you do you feel like
it strengthened your kinship to her or
to other people yeah I think it did and
I think um and it's ALS also again it's
just like I love people's sort of humor
and their selves and how they and how
these kinds of exchanges can really
Elevate that and there's a real
playfulness that was so apparent um when
we we hosted these exchanges and I'm
sure for folks who've already sort of
participated in it they've gotten a
sense of that as well but it can also go
in a lot of other directions so you have
the opportunity in your current role at
UC San Diego to like as you said work in
a very interdisciplinary way or involve
different kinds of disciplines into the
Gallery uh into Gallery experiences and
the workflow as well how do you like
what have you learned from doing that
over the past year um and what like how
would you want other institutions
to change the way that they operate to
incorporate some of those things yeah I
mean what she realizes everyone's
innately curious and so even if
someone's coming into the gallery and
they're like this is weird I don't know
what this is I don't know if I like this
every everyone will still come into the
gallery so um that's been really great
and then um but then also I'm in a
research institution and so the kinds of
conversations I have about the work are
from all over the place you know so some
people are coming to the shows and
they're Reading literature so when
people are writing poetry to each other
they're kind of seeing it through that
lens and so when I organize these shows
I have to think about what people are
bringing into the space and then also
what's percolating on campus and
colleagues of mine who are who
developing and working on different
things as well too so it's it's a it's a
it's a it's I it's been a really great
experience so far one thing also is that
you as a curator have a lot of
experience working of course with
artists with a wide variety of practices
as was demonstrated in the you know the
photos from the that were you just were
you just showed
um how do
you I you know I always think you how do
you bring all of this together like or
no that's not the question that I want
to ask how do you
um so many of the talks today have
spoken about hyper contemporary and
futuristic Technologies and the way that
they're going to impact Our Lives how do
you how are you feeling about this
current moment and through the
development of this show with Lauren
like what things what fears did it spark
what uh ideas or wants did it Inspire
for the future well I think as you
probably saw in this talk I just I
really truly believe in our core
humanity and no matter what happens or
where we go I think that will carry
through um and I think yeah a lot of the
conversations today I think we but we
also I think it's on artists to um have
uh create a critical conversation about
s of the problems of where we might go
and then also how these um Technologies
might um amplify a lot of those
inequities and issues um so yeah it's
sort of both both kind of making us
hyper aware of our present um imagining
different different types of um Futures
but always bringing us back to our core
selves which is which is our our
humanist and yeah awesome see us at the
saliva bar later guys thank you so much
so much thank you